RFC: Glimmer component `Signature` type (#748)
emberjs/rfcs: text/0748-glimmer-component-signature.md

This RFC proposes a change to that type parameter to become `Signature`, capturing more complete information about how components can be used in a template, including their expected **arguments**, the **block parameters** they provide, and what type of **element(s)** they apply any received attributes and modifiers to.

This RFC is based in large part on prior work by [@gossi] and on learnings from [Glint].

[@gossi]: https://github.com/gossi
[Glint]: https://github.com/typed-ember/glint

## Motivation

When a developer goes to invoke a component in a template, there are a variety of questions about its interface they need to be able to answer in order to determine how to use it correctly.

1. What arguments does this component accept?
   - Which arguments are required and which are optional?
   - What does each argument do?
   - What types of values am I expected to pass for a given argument?
2. How can I nest content within this component?
   - Does it accept a default block? Named blocks?
   - In what context will my block content appear in the component's output?

>    - For any blocks I write, what parameters does the component expose to them?

Reviewer: The current proposal does not seem to address all of these questions. The provided type information does not give a hint about the elements allowed within the block in all cases. E.g. if the component yields within a button element, a developer must only use [phrasing content](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/HTML/Content_categories#phrasing_content), which is not [interactive](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/HTML/Content_categories#interactive_content).

In most cases this could be derived from the `Element` type. But only the component also applies splat attributes to that element. This may not be desirable in all cases.

Also there is the case, in which a parent element, limits the permitted content of a child element. This is the case for any element, which allows transparent content (e.g. `<del>` and `<ins>`). In that case permitted content can not be derived from that element alone.

Not sure if that must be addressed by this RFC though. Maybe it is enough to explicitly name this limitation in the RFC.

Reviewer 2: > The current proposal does not seem to address all of these questions. 

It does; the additional very interesting point you raise about children is an *additional* point. While we could revise the RFC to make it explicit, the answer is implicit in the semantics of templates and unaffected by this proposal: they are simply functions of HTML. This proposal is not trying to specify a way to guarantee that no invalid HTML can be written. It is simply interested in extending the set of things which can be statically known about it for documentation and type checking purposes.

It might be possible to add in a further layer of analysis to accomplish that kind of analysis at a later point, but it is not a current goal for this doc or even for Glint. And it’s worth more that with this proposal and Glint, we are already doing more than any other JS framework. (The one ecosystem I think has taken a swing at the “allowed children” problem is PureScript, though I don’t know if their exploration in that space ended up broadly used even there. It is a very difficult problem because there is no inherent relationship between parent and child elements in HTML syntactically, only semantically.)

  </:row>
</FancyTable>
```

The backing class and signature might look something like:

```ts
export interface FancyTableSignature<T> {
  Args: {
    /** The items to be displayed in the fancy table, each corresponding to one row. */
    items: Array<T>
  };
  BlockParams: {
    /** Any header contents for the table, broken into cells. */
    header: [];

    /** Content to be rendered for each row, receiving the corresponding item and its index. */
    row: [item: T, index: number];
  };
}

export default class FancyTable<T> extends Component<FancyTableSignature<T>> {
  // ...
}
```

While the runtime design of named blocks currently only permits components to yield parameters out to them, community members have suggested possible ways of making blocks more akin to components themselves, potentially accepting `@args` or attributes, or even themselves accepting further nested blocks. Should such a design ever become reality, the shape of a signature might evolve to become more recursive. Today, however, there are many open questions about how such functionality would actually work for authors, and so we keep the proposed format here simple.

### `Element`

> The `Element` member of the signature declares what type of DOM element(s), if any, this component may be treated as encapsulating. That is, setting a non-`null` type for this member declares that this component may have HTML attributes applied to it, and that type reflects the type of DOM `Element` object any modifiers applied to the component will receive when they execute.

Reviewer 2: That’s correct. Note that the corresponding class is what’s used for regular HTML elements, too, so: `HTMLAnchorElement`, for an `a` tag, for example.

---
Stage: Proposed
Start Date: 2021-05-13
Release Date: Unreleased
Release Versions:
  ember-source: vX.Y.Z
  ember-data: vX.Y.Z
Relevant Team(s): Ember.js
RFC PR: https://github.com/emberjs/rfcs/pull/748
---

## Summary <!-- omit in toc -->

In TypeScript, the `@glimmer/component` base class currently has a single `Args` type parameter. This parameter declares the names and types of the arguments the component expects to receive.

> This RFC proposes a change to that type parameter to become `Signature`, capturing more complete information about how components can be used in a template, including their expected **arguments**, the **blocks** they provide, and what type of **element(s)** they apply any received attributes and modifiers to.

Author: ```suggestion
This RFC proposes a change to that type parameter to become `Signature`, capturing more complete information about how components can be used in a template, including their expected **arguments**, the **blocks** they accept, and what type of **element(s)** they apply any received attributes and modifiers to.
```

> This RFC proposes a change to that type parameter to become `Signature`, capturing more complete information about how components can be used in a template, including their expected **arguments**, the **block parameters** they provide, and what type of **element(s)** they apply any received attributes and modifiers to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This RFC proposes a change to that type parameter to become `Signature`, capturing more complete information about how components can be used in a template, including their expected **arguments**, the **blocks** they provide, and what type of **element(s)** they apply any received attributes and modifiers to.
```

### `BlockParams`

The `BlockParams` member dictates what blocks a component accepts and specifies what parameters, if any, it provides to those blocks. When `BlockParams` is a simple tuple type, that indicates that the component only yields to the default block:

```ts
BlockParams: [name: string];
```

```hbs
{{yield "Tomster"}}
```

However, `BlockParams` may also be an object type indicating what parameters a component's named blocks provide:

```ts
BlockParams: {
  header: [];
  body: [item: T; index: number]
}
```

```hbs
{{yield to="header"}}

{{#each items as |item index|}}
  {{yield item index to="body"}}
{{/each}}

> ```

Reviewer 2: We should probably include how we handle `default` in the extended case as well. (Note that a "suggestion" doesn't work here b/c of the nested code blocks, so I'm just going to "quote" the suggested text instead.)

> However, `BlockParams` may also be an object type indicating what parameters a component's named blocks provide. In that case, the `default` block may be specified by name:
> 
> ```ts
> BlockParams: {
>   header: [];
>   default: [];
>   listItem: [item: T; index: number]
> }
> ```
> 
> ```hbs
> <h1>{{yield to="header"}}</h1>
> 
> <div class='body'>
>   {{yield}}
> </div>
> 
> <ul class='items'>
>   {{#each items as |item index|}}
>     <li class='item'>{{yield item index to="listItem"}}</li>
>   {{/each}}
> </ul>
> ```

{{/if}}
```

For such cases, components can use a union type for their `Element`. In the case of the template above, the signature would have `Element: HTMLAnchorElement | HTMLSpanElement`. Correspondingly, any modifiers used with such components would need to accept any of the possible types of DOM elements declared.

> Similarly, a component that may use `...attributes` on an `<a>` element or may not spread them at all might write: `Element: HTMLAnchorElement | null`. In such cases, it would be legal to use any modifiers that accept an `HTMLAnchorElement`, since they wouldn't ever be invoked for the `null` scenario.

Reviewer 2: It's probably worth clarifying this slightly here by adding a note that ecosystem tooling which *consumes* this information should treat it safely accordingly.
